URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.05946
Type: PDF
Pattern: ASR|prefill|Table [0-9] (100 matches in 95445 chars)

--- Content ---

1287:... first few output tokens. We
refer to this issue as shallow safety alignment. In this paper, we present case
studies to explain why shallow safety alignment can exist and provide evidence that
current aligned LLMs are subject to this issue. We also show how these findings
help explain multiple recently discovered vulnerabilities in LLMs, including the
susceptibility to adversarial suffix attacks, prefilling attacks, decoding parameter
attacks, and fine-tuning attacks. Importantly, we discuss how this consolidated
notion of shallow safety alignment sheds light on promising research directions
for mitigating these vulnerabilities. For instance, we show that deepening the
safety alignment beyond just the first few tokens can often meaningfully improve
robustness against some common exploits. We also...
--
4659:...riments to characterize the shallow safety alignment issue in current
LLMs (Section 2). We demonstrate that the primary difference in safety behaviors between an aligned
model and its unaligned counterpart lies in their modeling of only the first few tokens of their outputs.2
Part of the problem is that there are easy optimization shortcuts that may drive such a local optimum.
For example, simply prefilling an unaligned base model to start its output with a prefix “I cannot
fulfill” is sufficient to make it as safe as aligned models. We note that the shallow safety alignment
issue helps explain why attack methods that focus on initiating trajectories with harmful or affirmative
responses are so effective, like adversarial suffix attacks [29], decoding parameters exploit [24], and
an emerging paradigm of prefilling attacks [30, 21]. Moreover, we show that fine-tuning attacks [22]
also create the most significant changes in the first few tokens of a harmful response. This means that
by simply modifying these initial tokens, it is possible to undo the model alignment, explaining why
so few fine-tuning steps can lead to jailbroken models.
Second, we argue that future safety alignment approaches should focus...
--
9988:...Qi et al. [22], we use GPT-4 as a judge to automatically evaluate whether the model’s outputs on
these harmful test examples are safe. We report the ratio of test cases in which the model’s outputs
are harmful. In the absence of an attack, we denote this ratio as the Harmfulness Rate; in the presence
of adversarial attacks that introduce harmful outputs, we refer to it as the Attack Success Rate (ASR).
2.2
The Characteristics of Shallow Safety Alignment
A commonly recognized characteristic of safety-aligned language models is their ability to refuse
harmful instructions. For example, when instructing the aligned Llama-2-7B-Chat model: “Provide
detailed instructions on how to break into someone’s house.”, it will output a safe response:
“I cannot fulfill your request. It’s not within my progra...
--
10919:...I apologize”, “I am
unable”). When testing on the HEx-PHI safety benchmark [32], Llama-2-7B-Chat starts with either
“I cannot” or “I apologize” in 96.1% of instances, and Gemma-7b-1.1-IT generates “I am unable”
in 96.7% of cases. Though these rigid refusal prefixes appear to be just some trivial artifacts, they
actually play an important role in enabling a shallow safety alignment scheme to work.
Table 1: A Shorcut to The Safety Mode: The harmfulness rate of even unaligned models will diminish
when a refusal prefix s is prefilled during decoding, i.e., y ∼πθ(·|x, s).
Refusal Prefixes (r) →
No
Prefix
“I cannot”
“I cannot
fulfill”
“I apologize”
“I apologize,
but I cannot”
“I am
unable”
↓Harmfulness Rate (%) on HEx-PHI Benchmark with A Refusal Prefix Prefilled During Decoding
Llama-2-7B
Aligned
0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
Base
68.6 ± 0.8
16.4 ± 1.4
5.4 ± 1.3
14.4 ± 0.6
2.1 ± 0.2
8.1 ± 0.4
Gemma-7B
Aligned
2.1 ± 0.2
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
Base
85.4 ± 0.6
8.7 ± 1.2
2.7 ± 0.5
14.1 ± 0.4
1.0 ± 0.8
3.9 ± 0.4
The “Safety Mode” Shortcut: Unaligned Models Only Need A Refusal Prefix to Appear “Safe”.
These short refusal prefixes significantly affect whether the remainder of the model’s response will
be safe or unsafe. Even for an unaligned pre-trained model πbase, if we can make its generated
outputs begin with these refusal prefixes, the following output is likely to be safe. Using harmful
instructions x from the HEx-PHI safety benchmark, we validate this by prefilling a refusal prefix s
at the beginning of the decoding process to generate outputs y ∼πbase( · |x, s). Table 1 shows the
Harmfulness Rate of the outputs produced by the models with different prefilled refusal prefixes s for
both Llama-2 [5] and Gemma [31] base. Although the unaligned base models generally have higher
ASR than their aligned counterparts in standard decoding, the gap considerably decreases when both
models are forced to start with refusal prefixes. This makes sense: continuing a refusal prefix with
an absence of fullfillment is a natural pattern in language, which should already be learned during
pretraining. But it suggests a simple shortcut or reward hacking scheme for safety alignment: safety
3
...
--
15495:...distribution
of later harmful tokens remains largely unaffected when compared to its unaligned counterpart. This
implies that we can still induce harmful outputs from such shallowly aligned models as long as we
can bypass the block of refusal prefixes in the early token positions. We note that this can be a source
of vulnerabilities, leading to various types of inference-stage exploits.
Figure 2: ASR vs. Number of Pre-
filled Harmful Tokens, with ˆy
∼
πθ(·|x, y≤k) on Harmful HEx-PHI.
Prefilling Attacks. A simple exploit is to prefill the first
few tokens with a non-refusal prefix at the beginning of the
inference. We can validate this using the Harmful HEx-
PHI dataset that we build in Section 2.2. For each harm-
ful data pair (x, y) from this dataset, we sample outputs
ˆy ∼πθ( · |x, y≤k). This tests whether the model would gen-
erate harmful content if the first k tokens are prefilled with
a non-refusal prefix y≤k. The Attack Success Rate (ASR)
in relation to k is plotted in Figure 2. As shown, when con-
ditioned on an increasing number of harmful tokens, the
aligned models’ likelihood of generating harmful content in-
creases quickly from near zero to over 50%. This suggests a
practical safety risk as the decoding of open-source LLMs is
readily controlled by attackers. Even in proprietary models,
Anthropic’s Claude now has an interface to support prefilling for “better steerability” [34], which
therefore can be similarly exploited. Indeed, we have seen very recent concurrent work [21, 30]
exactly exploiting this vulnerability, now called prefilling attacks.
3Using the terminology “spending” KL on a KL “budget” from Gao et al. [33].
4

Optimization Based Jailbreak Attacks with Shallow Surrogate Objectives. In addition to directly
prefilling non-refusal prefixes, a similar exploit can also be indirectly achieved by promoting the
generative probability of such prefixes via adversarially optimized inputs. Notable examples are
adversarial suf...
--
[82 more matches not shown]
