URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.02600
Type: PDF
Pattern: SRI|Step-Wise Refusal Internal|defined as|we compute|signal (297 matches in 95517 chars)

--- Content ---

1313:...ping refusal behavior
remains poorly understood. To address this gap,
we present a comprehensive study of step-wise
refusal dynamics. We show that diffusion re-
masking can promote recovery from harmful
intermediate generations, provide evidence that
this behavior is tied to the sampling mechanism,
and demonstrate that switching from AR to dif-
fusion sampling improves jailbreak robustness,
including under fixed model weights. To cap-
ture generation dynamics not observable at the
text level, we propose the Step-Wise Refusal
Internal Dynamics (SRI) signal. Consistent
with our text-level findings, SRI shows that re-
covery fails primarily under AR sampling, with
these failures often appearing anomalous rela-
tive to harmless generations in the SRI space.
Based on this observation, we show that SRI
enables a simple jailbreak detector that does
not modify inference and generalizes to un-
seen attacks by training only on benign SRI
signals. Our evaluation shows that this detector
matches or outperforms existing jailbreak de-
tection baselines while adding negligible over-
head.
Code: https://elironrahimi.github.io/sri-signal/
.
Content warning. This paper contains examples
of harmful language used solely for research and
analysis purposes.
1
Introduction
Generative artificial intelligence has advanced
rapidly, driven primarily by large language models
(LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023).
Most deployed LLMs rely on autoregressive (AR)
transformer decoders (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown
Figure 1: Recovery from harmful intermediate content
during diffusion generation in LLaDA. Harmful tokens
produced at intermediate steps are iteratively revised
across diff...
--
3667:... to strong AR baselines,
while exhibiting distinct advantages tied to diffu-
sion sampling (Nie et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025;
Yu et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025a), with LLaDA-
2 (Bie et al., 2025) extending these results to the
100B-parameter regime.
At the same time, LLM safety has become a criti-
cal research challenge (Shi et al., 2024; Dong et al.,
2025). Prior work has extensively studied jailbreak
attacks, refusal behavior, and the interpretability
1
arXiv:2602.02600v3  [cs.LG]  5 Jun 2026

Figure 2: Example of anomalous behavior in the SRI
space that is not visible at the text level for Qwen, an
AR model. The SRI signal for a harmful generation
is shown alongside reference SRI signals for harmless
and refused responses, with the dashed line denoting the
text-level refusal signal.
of safety mechanisms in AR models (Lee et al.,
2025; Xu and Parhi, 2025; Levi et al., 2025). Only
recently have these questions begun to be explored
for DLMs (Wen et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025;
Li et al., 2025). While prior work provides ini-
tial evidence of improved robustness to jailbreak
attacks (Zhang et al., 2025), it remains unclear
whether this robustness arises from the sampling
mechanism or from other factors, such as internal
learned representations.
In this work, we present a comprehensive study
of step-wise refusal dynamics. We show that diffu-
sion remasking can promote recovery from harmful
intermediate generations (Figure 1), provide evi-
dence that this behavior is tied to the sampling
mechanism, and demonstrate that switching from
AR to diffusion sampling improves jailbreak ro-
bustness, including under fixed model weights. To
capture recovery dynamics that are not observable
at the text level, we introduce the Step-Wise Re-
fusal Internal Dynamics (SRI) signal. SRI enables
a deeper analysis of recovery behavior and safety
failures, including cases where models fail to re-
cover from jailbreak attacks primarily under AR
sampling. Moreover, these failures often appear
anomalous relative to harmless compliant gener-
ations in the SRI representation space (Figure 2).
Based on this observation, we show that SRI en-
ables a simple jailbreak detector that does not mod-
ify inference and generalizes to unseen attacks by
training only on benign SRI signals. Our com-
prehensive evaluation reports detection and false-
positive results that match or outperform existing
jailbreak detection baselines while adding negligi-
ble inference-time overhead.
2
Text-Level Analysis of Step-Wise
Refusal Dynamics
Prior work has shown that traditional AR-LLMs
are vulnerable to jailbreak attacks, and that such
attacks can induce internal conflict during gener-
ation (Liu e...
--
[277 more matches not shown]
