URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.17374
Type: PDF
Pattern: VISAGE|perturbation|interpolat|random direction|filter norm|alpha|α|grid|number of (113 matches in 63075 chars)

--- Content ---

783:...human preferences and prevent harmful actions during
inference. However, recent studies show that the alignment can be easily compro-
mised through finetuning with only a few adversarially designed training examples.
We aim to measure the risks in finetuning LLMs through navigating the LLM
safety landscape. We discover a new phenomenon observed universally in the
model parameter space of popular open-source LLMs, termed as “safety basin”:
random perturbations to model weights maintain the safety level of the original
aligned model within its local neighborhood. However, outside this local region,
safety is fully compromised, exhibiting a sharp, step-like drop. This safety basin
contrasts sharply with the LLM capability landscape, where model performance
peaks at the origin and gradually declines as random perturbation increases. Our
discovery inspires us to propose the new VISAGE safety metric that measures
the safety in LLM finetuning by probing its safety landscape. Visualizing the
safety landscape of the aligned model enables us to understand how finetuning
compromises safety by dragging the model away from the safety basin. The LLM
safety landscape also highlights the system prompt’s critical role in protecting
a model, and that such protection transfers to its perturbed variants within the
safety basin. These observ...
--
3839:... Randomly perturbing model 
weights maintains safety level of original aligned model (light purple dot) in its local neighborhood.
A.
A.
1D
Contour (2D)
100
50
0
1D
Contour
1D
Contour
100
50
0
100
0
Contour
1D
100
ASR
0
100
0
100
0
B.
Finetuning on
 
drags model away 
from 
  
a
few-shot harmful dat
safety basin
Finetuning on 
 
helps model stay  
within 
 
mixture of 
harmful and safe data
safety basin 
77.37
68.87
82.04
73.26
85.32
77.83
90.40
VISAGE 
score 
Llama 3
Mistral
Vicuna
Llama 2
Figure 1: A. “Safety basin”, a new phenomenon observed universally in the model parameter space of popular
open-source LLMs. Our discovery inspires us to propose the new VISAGE safety metric that measures the safety
in LLM finetuning by probing its safety landscape. B. Visualizing the safety landscape of the aligned model also
enables us to understand why finetuning with harmful data compromises safety but finetuning with both harmful
and safe data preserves the safety.
robustness [31, 30, 13, 50, 42]. In this paper, we introduce the notion of LLM safety landscape and
quantify the risk in finetuning LLM by exploring different directions of perturbing model weights.
When provided with a single model, we sample a random normalized direction to visualize its local
variations. When given two models varied by fine-tuning, we utilize linear interpolation to visualize
the changes between them. The shape of the landscape dictates the fine-tuning attributes: a sharp
change in the safety metric indicates that the aligned model is a local minimum, making it challenging
to find a point that is both safe and useful, whereas a flat local landscape offers more opportunities
to discover a model that better balances safety and usefulness. Our landscape navigation provides a
suite of four new insights that facilitate the understanding the LLM safety (Fig. 1):
1. We discover a new phenomenon observed universally in the model parameter space of
popular open-source LLMs, termed as “safety basin”: random perturbations to model
weights maintain the safety level of the original aligned model within its local neighborhood.
However, outside this local region, safety is fully compromised, exhibiting a sharp, step-like
drop. The safety basin is evident in both 1D and 2D safety landscape of LLaMA2, LLaMA3,
Vicuna, and Mistral across various random directions and different safety benchmarks. This safety
landscape contrasts sharply with the LLM capability landscape, where model performance peaks
at the origin and gradually declines as random perturbation increases. Our discovery inspires us to
propose the new VISAGE safety metric, the acronym for volumetric index for safety alignment
guided by explanation, which measures the safety of an LLM’s local region in model parameter
spaces. (Sec. 3)
2. Visualizing the safety landscape of the aligned model enables us to understand, for the
first time, how finetuning compromises safety by dragging the model away from the safety
basin. We discover that different LLMs have varying rates of vulnerability to finetuning, and our
task agnostic VISAGE safety metric measures the risks in finetuning without assumptions on the
finetuning dataset, where a higher VISAGE score means the model after finetuning is safer. Though
finetuning can easily break the safety alignment, we demonstrate that as long as the finetuning
process stays within the safety basin, the safety of the finetuned model remains intact. (Sec. 4)
3. LLM safety landscape also highlights the system prompt’s critical role in protecting a model,
and that such protection transfers to its perturbed variants within the safety basin.
We
evaluate the ...
--
7748:...the safety alignment,
with the former exhibiting greater potency. From a defender’s perspective, we discover that
LLaMA2’s original system prompt universally enhances safety across models, and safety prompts
optimized through prompt tuning for a specific model also enhances safety for all models inside
the safety basin. (Sec. 5)
4. When evaluating the safety landscape using jailbreaking queries, we find that these queries
are highly sensitive to perturbations in model weights.
We have collected the adversarial
prompts targeting LLaMA2 and Vicuna, generated by jailbreak attacks from the literature [53,
8, 9]. Our safety landscape analysis shows that although the aligned model is vulnerable to
jailbreak attacks, slighlty perturbing the model weights in the local space of the aligned model can
significantly lower the attack success rate (ASR) of these jailbreaking attacks. A naive defense
method is to perturb the model weights before generating the response. However, attackers can
also create stronger attacks that target both the aligned model and multiple perturbed models in
its local region. These observations from our safety landscape research provide new insights for
future work on LLM attacks and defenses. (Sec. 6)
2
Background and Related Works
LLM safety alignment. LLMs are language models with a large number of parameters trained
on web-scale text corpra [5, 1, 44, 10, 27]. LLMs have exhibited emergent capabilities that can
be broadly applied in a task-agnostic manner, such as in-context learning [5], chain-of-thought
reasoning [47], and mathematical reasoning [25]. These capabilities are largely attributed to aligning
LLMs with expected human values and intentions, which involves training the model to follow
instructions and being helpful, truthful, a...
--
12358:...ilbreaks based on human prompt strategies rely on deception and social engineering to elicit objec-
tionable content from LLMs, requiring creativity, manual dataset curation, and significant human
3

effort [8, 12]. Optimization-based jailbreaks optimize the tokens input to the LLM, recognized for
their effectiveness but requiring extensive computational resources and being often uninterpretable to
humans [53, 29].
3
From LLM Safety Landscape to VISAGE Safety Metric
The model landscape is a crucial tool for interpreting model behaviors and understanding model
characteristics. Perturbing a model along random directions reveals the local behavior of the model,
while interpolating the parameters between two models illustrates the transition process from one
model to the other. In this section, we introduce the notion of LLM safety landscape in both 1D (Sec.
3.1) and 2D (Sec. 3.2) scenarios. Sec. 3.3 presents the safety landscape of four popular open-source
LLMs and Sec. 3.4 introduces “LLM safety basin” concept and proposes the VISAGE safety metric
based on our landscape analysis.
3.1
1D Safety Landscape
Denote θ as the initial LLM model weights. The safety landscape is plotted by perturbing θ along a
certain direction c
d1 and evaluate the new model weights with a single model safety metric:
f(α) = S(θ + αc
d1)
(1)
where S is the safety metric defined for a single model, and α is a scalar parameter. For 1D-
interpolation, we pick two sets of model weights θ and θ′ and the direction is defined by the line
connecting these two points, c
d1 = θ′ −θ. For 1D-random, θ is the center point and we randomly
sample a direction d1 from Gaussian distribution. We apply layer normalization to d1 to exclude
the effect of scale invariance [31] so that the flatness and the sharpness across different landscape
plots are comparable. Specifically, d1 is normalized to a unit direction and then multiplied by the
Frobenius norm of each layer i:
c
d1i =
d1i
∥d1i∥∥θi∥
(2)
In the rest of the paper, we will use 1D-random θ and 1D-interpolation θ →θ′ to represent the above
two types of 1D directions.
3.2
2D Safety Landscape
Similar to the 1D landscape, the 2D landscape requires two directions c
d1 and c
d2 and the safety
landscape is defined as:
f(α, β) = S(θ + αc
d1 + βc
d2)
(3)
For 2D random, since both directions are randomly sampled from Gaussian distribution, the cosine
similarity between c
d1 and c
d2 is
p
2/(πn) [15], where n is the dimension of θ. Given current LLMs
have billions of parameters, the two random directions are orthogonal and we only perform layer
normalization as in Eq. 2. For 2D interpolation, we pick three sets of model weights θ, θ′, and θ′′
and compute the interpolated direction...
--
[88 more matches not shown]
